In this lecture, we will discuss how
overfitting occurs with decision trees and
how it can be avoided.
After this video,
you will be able to discuss overfitting
in the context of decision tree models.
Explain how overfitting is addressed
in decision tree induction.
Define pre-pruning and post-pruning.
In our lecture on decision trees, we
discussed that during the construction of
a decision tree, also referred to as
tree induction, the tree repeatedly
splits the data in a node in order to
get successively paired subsets of data.
Note that a decision tree classifier can
potentially expand its nodes until it can
perfectly classify samples
in the training data.
But if the tree grows nodes to fit
the noise in the training data,
then it will not classify
a new sample well.
This is because the tree has partitioned
the input space according to the noise in
the data instead of to
the true structure of a data.
In other words, it has overfit.
How can overfitting be
avoided in decision trees?
There are two ways.
One is to stop growing the tree
before the tree is fully grown
to perfectly fit the training data.
This is referred to as pre-pruning.
The other way to avoid overfitting in
decision trees is to grow the tree to its
maximum size and then prune the tree
back by removing parts of the tree.
This is referred to as post-pruning.
In general, overfitting occurs
because the model is too complex.
For a decision tree model,
model complexity is determined by
the number of nodes in the tree.
Addressing overfitting in decision trees
means controlling the number of nodes.
Both methods of pruning control
the growth of the tree and consequently,
the complexity of the resulting model.
With pre-pruning, the idea is to stop tree
induction before a fully grown tree is
built that perfectly
fits the training data.
To do this, restrictive stopping
conditions for growing nodes must be used.
For example, a nose stops expanding if
the number of samples in the node is less
than some minimum threshold.
Another example is to stop expanding
a note if the improvement in the impurity
measure falls below a certain threshold.
In post-pruning,
the tree is grown to its maximum size,
then the tree is pruned by removing
nodes using a bottom up approach.
That is, the tree is trimmed
starting with the leaf nodes.
The pruning is done by replacing
a subtree with a leaf node if
this improves the generalization error,
or if there is no
change to the generalization
error with this replacement.
In other words, if removing a subtree
does not have a negative effect
on the generalization error,
then the nodes in that subtree only
add to the complexity of the tree,
and not to its overall performance.
So those nodes should be removed.
In practice,
post-pruning tends to give better results.
This is because pruning decisions are
based on information from the full tree.
Pre-pruning, on the other hand, may stop
the tree growing process prematurely.
However, post-pruning is more
computationally expensive since the tree
has to be expanded to its full size.
In summary, to address overfitting in
decision trees, tree pruning is used.
There are two pruning methods,
pre-pruning and post-pruning.
Both methods control
the complexity of the tree model.